Initial version of AsciiDoc plugin (#4)
itsallcode/openfasttrace-asciidoc-plugin: doc/spec/design.adoc

Reviewer: Small general observation: the spec uses a lot of passive voice. While I really like the content of the document, that is a factor that could be improved.

Author: Can you provide an example from this document for how you would like text to be re-phrased?

Reviewer: There are many examples available, depending on your personal preferences.

1. [OpenFastTrace Architecture Template / Runtime view](https://github.com/itsallcode/openfasttrace-architecture-template/blob/main/src/doc/runtime_view/ordering_dishes.md) uses "who does what" style.
2. [RFC2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119) describes how internet RFCs use imperatives. Imperatives make use of active voice more natural.
3. [User Stories](https://www.agilealliance.org/glossary/user-story-template/) are usually found in system requirements, but seldom in technical designs.

The main point is that using active voice your sentence needs a subject. Which is a good thing, since it clearly states who the actor is. In user-level requirements the actors are mostly people. In design specs the actors are a mix of modules and people.

My recommendation is:

<person / modules> <does thing> [<in order to>]

That is the closest to natural language and still precise. The rationale part in the end is often so obvious in design documents that you can skip it.

Author: > My recommendation is:
>
> <person / modules> []
>
> That is the closest to natural language and still precise. The rationale part in the end is often so obvious in design documents that you can skip it.

I am not sure if I understand correctly. Or maybe your recommended text/pattern is missing something?

Thanks for the links. However, it would be easier for me to understand what you mean, if you could provide a re-phrased paragraph from the design.adoc. I guess I can then adapt the documents accordingly.

Reviewer: The text is indeed incomplete. Strange. I remember typing the rest. Maybe forgot to update.

[<condition>] <person / module> <does> [<in-order-to>]

The parts in square brackets are optional.

Example:

> If the `.description` tag is missing, the AsciiDoc importer uses the first paragraph after the headline as description.

Reviewer: Anyway, that is more a tip for the future. Let's get that PR merged, shall we? :-)

== Context

=== Technical Constraints

The plugin must be implemented in Java in order to work with the OFT engine.

=== Conventions

== Building Block View

=== AsciiDoc Importer

The AsciiDoc Importer reads specification items from ASciiDoc files.

== Runtime View

=== Import

The OFT engine discovers the AsciiDoc Importer during startup by means of Java's Service Discovery mechanism. The OFT engine then invokes the importer for all files having an `.adoc` extension to read specification items from the files. The importer emits corresponding events that are consumed by the OFT engine's [import event listener](#import-event-listener).

Common parts of the import like filtering out unnecessary items or attributes are handled by the listener.

== Deployment View

The AsciiDoc Importer is provided by means of a set of Java Archive (jar) files.

== Concepts

[.specitem, oft-skipped="dsn", oft-needs="impl, utest", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-file-extensions~1"]
--
--

== Data Structures

=== AsciiDoc-style Structures

> [.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-specification-item-markup~1", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-standard-syntax~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]

Reviewer: Nicely readable. I like it.

==== AsciiDoc Specification Item Markup

A block or inline element of an AsciiDoc document is marked up as an _AsciiDoc specification item_ by means of assigning the `.specitem` _role attribute_ to it.

.Example
[example]
----
[.specitem, oft-sid="req~first-requirement~1", oft-needs="dsn"]
== First Requirement

This is the specification item's description.
----

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-specification-item-id~1", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-standard-syntax~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
==== AsciiDoc Specification Item ID

The identifier of an AsciiDoc specification item is set by means of assigning the `oft-sid` _named attribute_ to it.

> The value of the attribute is a standard OFT specification item ID.

Reviewer: Very good. Not shortening it means that all the important text-magic tricks (`grep`, `sed`, `awk`, …) work.

.Example
[example]
----
[.specitem, oft-sid="req~first-requirement~1", oft-needs="dsn"]
== First Requirement

This is the description of the first requirement.
----

.Rationale

> [.rationale]

Reviewer: This here is a bit of duplication, but I guess it is in line with the spirit of AsciiDoc. Also it allows spec item paragraph headlines in different languages. A thing that MD / RST don't support.

Author: Exactly, the `.Rationale` is simply the block's title and can be anything (or omitted)

Using a named attribute for setting the specification item ID allows to easily retrieve the ID from a block using the existing AsciiDoctorJ API.

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-specification-item-title~1", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-standard-syntax~1, req~asciidoc-outline-readable~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
==== AsciiDoc Specification Item Title

If the block or inline element marked up as a specification item has an AsciiDoc title, then the AsciiDoc title is used as the title for the specification item.

.Rationale
[.rationale]
AsciiDoc titles show up in the outline and are a natural way of defining a requirement title.

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-specification-item-description~1", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-standard-syntax~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
==== AsciiDoc Specification Item Description

> If the first nested block inside the AsciiDoc specification item has no `.rationale` nor `.comment` role attribute, then it is used as the specification item description. Otherwise, the first nested block having the `.description` role attribute is used. If no such block exists, the specification item has no description.

Reviewer: Good. This is very consistent with the existing importers!

== First Requirement

.Description
[.description]
The description is contained in a delimited block with the `.description` role attribute.
----

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-specification-item-rationale~1", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-standard-syntax~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
==== AsciiDoc Specification Item Rationale

The rationale for an AsciiDoc specification item can be provided by means of adding a delimited block to it which has the `.rationale` role attribute.

.Example
[example]
----
[.specitem, oft-sid="req~first-requirement~1", oft-needs="dsn"]
== First Requirement

This is the specification item's description.

.Rationale
[.rationale]
The reason for this requirement is ...
----

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-specification-item-comment~1", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-standard-syntax~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
==== AsciiDoc Specification Item Comment

A comment can be added to an AsciiDoc specification item by means of adding a delimited block to it which has the `.comment` role attribute.

.Example
[example]
----
[.specitem, oft-sid="req~first-requirement~1", oft-needs="dsn"]
== First Requirement

This is the specification item's description.

.Comment
[.comment]

> On a side note, this requirement has emerged after years of experience with similar systems ...

Reviewer: :-)

> As is written in the prophecies.

----

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-covers-list~1", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-standard-syntax~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
==== AsciiDoc "Covers" list

> The list of specification items covered by an AsciiDoc specification item can be set by means of assigning the `oft-covers` _named attribute_ to it. The value of the attribute is a comma separated list of `requirement-id`s.

Reviewer: It might be a good idea to spell out what the allowed separator(s) is / are.

Author: Isn't that clear from 

> The value of the attribute is a comma separated list of `requirement-id`s.

Reviewer: Right. I must have overread this. Damn I read that sentence twice and still missed it. My bad.

.Example
[example]
----
[.specitem, oft-sid="req~first-requirement~1", oft-needs="dsn"]
== First Requirement

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~first-design-item~1", oft-needs="impl, utest", oft-covers="req~first-requirement~1"]
== First Design Item
----

.Rationale
[.rationale]

> Specifying the covered specification items by means of an attribute has the advantage of not being rendered by standard AsciiDoc processors and thus not cluttering the output with (meaningless) identifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refererencing the covered specification items by means of an attribute has the advantage of not being rendered by standard AsciiDoc processors and thus not cluttering the output with (meaningless) identifiers.
```

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-depends-list~1", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-standard-syntax~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
==== AsciiDoc "Depends" list

> The list of specification items that an AsciiDoc specification item depends on can be set by means of assigning the `oft-depends` _named attribute_ to it. The value of the attribute is a comma separated list of `requirement-id`s.

Reviewer: Here we have the separator spelt out. Good!

.Example
[example]
----
[.specitem, oft-sid="req~first-requirement~1", oft-needs="dsn"]
== First Requirement

This is the description of the first requirement.

[.specitem, oft-sid="req~second-requirement~1", oft-needs="dsn", oft-depends="req~first-requirement~1"]
== Second Requirement

This is the description of the second requirement.
----

.Rationale
[.rationale]

> Specifying the depended upon specification items by means of an attribute has the advantage of not being rendered by standard AsciiDoc processors and thus not cluttering the output with (meaningless) identifiers.

Reviewer: Fair enough. I guess you can still have a rendered form that the QA people can use to check the dependencies.

Author: I guess so, too. However, I do not know from the top of my head what you would need to do for that ...

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-needs-coverage-list~1", oft-covers="req~asciidoc-standard-syntax~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
==== AsciiDoc "Needs" List

> The list of artifact types that are needed to fully cover an AsciiDoc specification item can be set by means of assigning the `oft-needs` _named attribute_ to it. The value of the attribute is a comma separated list of artifact types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of artifact types that are needed to fully cover another specification item can be set by means of assigning the `oft-needs` _named attribute_ to it. The value of the attribute is a comma separated list of artifact types.
```

Since OFT is agnostic of the input format once a document went through the importer, it is _any_ specification item.

.Example
[example]
----
[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~first-design-item~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
== First Design Item

This is the description of the first design item.
----

[.specitem, oft-sid="dsn~adoc-artifact-forwarding-notation~1", oft-covers="req~artifact-type-forwarding-in-asciidoc~1", oft-needs="impl, utest"]
==== AsciiDoc Artifact Forwarding Notation

The AsciiDoc Importer forwarding required coverage from one artifact type to one or more different artifact types by means of adding an empty block with the following attribute list:

1. The `.specitem` role.
2. The `oft-skipped` named attribute. The value of the attribute is artifact type being skipped,
3. The `oft-needs` named attribute. The value of the attribute is a comma separated list of artifact types to forward to.

> 4. The `oft-covered` named attribute. The value of the attribute is the specification item ID being covered.

Reviewer: Kudos aiming for completion in the first version already. This is a feature that I would have added later.

.Example
[example]
----
[.specitem, oft-skipped="dsn", oft-needs="impl, utest", oft-covered="req~first-requirement~1"]
--
--
----

NOTE: The absence of the `oft-sid` attribute in this case is intentional.

== Design Decisions

> 

Reviewer: A design decision that explains why you picked the AsciiDoc library you chose would be interesting. Other options you considered and what were the deciding factors.

Author: I have added a corresponding section

=== Representation of Specification Item Properties in AsciiDoc

The AsciiDoc Importer uses AsciiDoc Element Attributes to explicitly mark up specification item properties.

Rationale:

* Only the specification item's content itself (description, rationale, comments) appears in the rendered document by default

> * The specification item's properties can easily (and specifically) be retrieved using the existing AsciiDoctorJ framework's document query API

Reviewer: You could add here that this presents an opportunity for i18n.

Author: I have amended the first item accordingly.

==== Why is this relevant?

The way that the specification item properties are represented in the AsciiDoc document determines the whole approach of retrieving and processing the information into Specifification Items. Changing this approach later on will be costly.

==== Alternatives considered

1. Follow the same Approach as the one taken for plain Markdown.
+
--
This would mean to put all data into the content of the AsciiDoc blocks and use _well known_ labels like `Rationale` or `Needs` to mark up information.

Pros:

* AsciiDoc specifications are consistent with specifications written in plain Markdown
* Might be able to reuse/copy code from the Markdown Importer

Cons:

* Specification item identifiers cluttering the rendered document, making it hard to read

> --

Reviewer: I agree with following the spirit of the import format. Markdown is intentionally devoid of pragmas. AsciiDoc has them for good reasons.

=== AsciiDoc Parsing

The AsciiDoc Importer uses the https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctorj[AsciiDoctorJ] library for parsing specification items from AsciiDoc files.

Rationale:

* Using an AsciiDoc parser library makes it easy to extract information contained in standard AsciiDoc document elements like _blocks, attributes, sections_ etc.
* Given that the Importer itself is implemented in Java, using a Java-based parser library makes it very easy to integrate.
* The https://asciidoctor.org[Asciidoctor project] provides a popular Ruby-based processing and publishing framework for AsciiDoc. It also provides Java bindings by means of the https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoctorj/latest/[AsciiDoctorJ library].
* _AsciiDoctorJ_ supports reading UTF-8 encoded AsciiDoc files.

==== Why is this relevant?

The Importer's main function is to extract information from AsciiDoc documents. Using an existing library/tool for processing AsciiDoc has the potential to save a lot of work with implementing and testing the basic parsing functionality which is not specific to OFT.

==== Alternatives considered

1. Use https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor.js[AsciiDoctorJS].
+
Cons:

> * Requires running JavaScript from Java which is not as well supported as using a Java library.

Reviewer: Thanks for adding this! :+1:

Reviewer: :heavy_check_mark: Approved.
